as a kid I used to dream about the ocean
it was this wild place full of color and
life home to these alien looking
fantastical creatures I pictured big
sharks who in the future and saw
graceful sea turtles dancing across
coral reefs as a marine biologist turned
photographer I've spent most of my
career looking for places as magical as
those I used to dream about when I was
little as you can see I began exploring
bodies of water had a fairly young age
but the first time I truly went
underwater I was about 10 years old and
I can still vividly remember furiously
finicky to reach this old and crusted
cat on the shallow coral reef when I
finally managed to grab all of it I
looked up and I was instantly surrounded
by fish in all colors of the rainbow
that was the day I fell in love with the
ocean in my 40 years on this planet I've
had the great privilege to explore some
of its most incredible seascapes
for National Geographic magazine and the
save our seas foundation I photographed
everything for really really big sharks
- dainty ones that fit in the palm of
your hand I've smelled the fishy fishy
breath of humpback whales feeding just
feet away from me in the cold seas of
Canada's Great Bear Rainforest and I've
been privy to the mating rituals of
green sea turtles in the Mozambique
Channel everyone on this planet effects
and is affected by the ocean and the
pristine seas I used to dream of as a
child are becoming harder and harder to
find
they're becoming more compressed
and more threatened as we humans
continue to maintain our role as the
leading predator on earth I have
witnessed and photographed many of these
ripple effect firsthand for a long time
I thought I had to shock my audience out
of their indifference with disturbing
images and while this approaches merits
I have come full circle I believe that
the best way for me to affect change is
to sell love I guess I'm a matchmaker of
sorts and as a photographer I have the
rare opportunity to reveal animals and
entire ecosystems that lie hidden
beneath the ocean's surface you can't
love something and become a champion for
it if you don't know it exists
uncovering this that is the power of
conservation of the target
I visited hundreds of marine locations
but there are a handful of seascape that
have touched me incredibly deeply the
first time I experienced that kind of
high was about ten years ago of South
Africa's rugged wild coast at every June
and July enormous shoals of sardines
travel northwards and a mass migration
we call this our ela and boy to those
fish every reason to run in hot pursuit
our words of hungry and agile predators
common dolphins and together and they
can separate some of the sardines from
the main show when they create bait
balls they drive and trap the fish
upward against the ocean surface and
then they rush in to dine on this
pulsating and moveable feast
close behind our sharks now most people
leave that sharks and dolphins are these
mortal enemies but during the sardine
run they actually coexist in fact
dolphins actually help sharks be more
effectively without dolphins of bait
balls are more dispersed and sharks
often end up with what I call a sardine
doughnut or a mouthful of water now
while I've had a few spicy moments with
sharks on the sardine run I know they
don't see me as prey however I get
bumped and tail slap just like any other
guest at this rowdy rowdy banquet from
the shores of Africa we travel east
across the vastness that is the Indian
Ocean to the Maldives a archipelago of
coral islands
and during the stormy southwest monsoon
man tourists from all across the
archipelago travel to a tiny speck in
battle called honey for armies of
crustaceans most no bigger than the size
of your pupils are the mainstay of the
matter is diet when plankton
concentrations become patchy manta rays
feed alone and they somersault
themselves backwards again and again
very much like a puppy chasing its own
tail
however when planking densities increase
the mantas line up head to tail to form
these long feeding chains and any tasty
morsel escapes the first or second
Mansion line is surely to be gobbled up
by the next or the one after as plankton
levels peak in the bathe the mantas swim
closer and closer together in a unique
behavior we call cyclone feeding and as
they swirl in tight formation this
multi-step column of mantas creates his
own vortex you know sucking in and
delivering the plankton right into the
mantas cavernous mouths the experience
of diving amongst such masses of
hundreds of rays is truly unforgettable
when I first photographed hanifaru the
site enjoyed no protection and was
threatened by development and working
with NGOs like the matter trust my
images eventually helped Hani Farrow
become a marine protected area now
fishermen from neighboring islands they
once hunted these manta rays to make
traditional drums from their skins today
they are the most ardent conservation
champions and manta rays earn the motive
an economy in excess of 8 million
dollars every single year I have always
wanted to travel back in time to an era
where maps were mostly blank or they
read you know there be dragons and today
the closest I've come is visiting remote
atolls in the western Indian Ocean far
far away from shipping lanes and fishing
fleets diving into these waters is a
poignant reminder of what our oceans
once looked like very few people have
heard of a basta India a tiny speck of
coral in the Mozambique Channel this
reef forms a protective outer barrier
and the inner Lagoon is a nursery ground
for Galapagos sharks now these sharks
are anything but shy even during the day
died in a bit of a hunch that they would
be even bolder and more abundant at
night
never before have I encountered so many
sharks on a single coral outcrop
capturing and sharing the moments like
this that reminds me why I chose my path
earlier this year I was on assignment
for National Geographic magazine in Baja
California and about half way down the
peninsula on the Pacific side by sunny
NASA Laguna a critical carving ground
for grey whales for a hundred years this
coast was the scene of a wholesale
slaughter where more than 20,000 gray
whales were killed reading only a few
hundred survivors today the descendants
of these same whales nudge the
youngsters to the surface to play and
even interact with us
this species truly has made a remarkable
comeback now on the other side of the
peninsula lies capital a sleepy fishing
village and decades over fishing and
brought them close to collapse in 1995
local fishermen convinced the
authorities to proclaim their waters in
marine reserve but what happened next
was you know nothing short of miraculous
in 2005 after only a single decade of
protection scientists measure the
largest recovery of fish ever recorded
but don't take my word for it come with
me
on a single breath swim with me in deep
into one of the largest and densest
schools of fish I have ever encountered
we all have the ability to be creators
of hope and through my photography I
want to pass on the message that it is
not too late for our oceans in
particular I want to focus on nature's
resilience in the face of 7.3 billion
people my hope is that in the future I
will have to search much much harder to
make photographs like this while
creating images that showcase our
respectful coexistence with the ocean
now those will hopefully become an
everyday occurrence for me to thrive and
survive in my profession you know you
really have to be a hopeless optimist
and I always operate on the assumption
that the next great picture that will
affect change is right around the corner
behind the next coral head inside the
next lagoon or possibly in the one after
you